# The Vetchi Manifesto

```quote
I know exactly about you. I know about the work that you used to do. Knowledge is not my problem. Doing something with that knowledge, that is where you would come. You can call me Vetchi. I think you and I can help one another. You need a purpose. More specifically, you need a job.

-- Paraphrased from Person of Interest, when Harold Finch meets John Reese
```

Vetchi aims to be an Opensource social networking platform to connect Employees looking for Jobs and Employers trying to hire. Think of it as Linux Kernel, Sqlite, RedHat, Canonical, SUSE (you get the idea) etc., but for Jobs. Vetchi could potentially grow to be a behemoth multi-billion platform for all things HRMS (or) could join the list of my inconsequential side-projects (or) somewhere in-between. But as with any positive beginning, the Vetchi project aims to `put a ding in the universe`.

# Motivations

I work as a Software Engineer in India. I had been responsible for hiring, setting up new teams for multiple startups, interviewed a lot of people over the last 2 decades. I strongly feel that the current IT hiring system (Leetcoding, Competitive programming, DSAs, Whiteboard coding, etc) is broken. I believe that there are some experiments that we could attempt to fix the hiring processes so that things move faster and is less gruelling for everyone involved. 

Vetchi is an attempt to fix the problem by creating an universal database of Employees, becoming a marketplace for various Employers to hire these people. There are a dozen websites that already do this (Linkedin, Naukri, Monster, Indeed, etc.) and are worth billions of dollars. So what makes Vetchi different ? I believe that none of the current solutions consider the phenomenon that made HomoSapiens the dominant species of planet earth, the *Network of Trust*. While Vetchi was initially thought to scratch my personal itch related to Programming Jobs, it would be designed as a generic Jobs platform, that should be usable across myriad domains and sectors. Before expanding that further, let us look at some of the existing problems in tech jobs hiring.

## Broken Tech Interviews

If a Hospital wants to hire a Doctor, they do not ask an applicant Doctor to dissect a Rat. If a Restaurant wants to hire a chef, they do not demand that the applicant chops a kilogram of Onions as a gating criteria. But routinely this is what we do in Tech interviews. We ask the Interview Candidate to `invert a binary tree` even though the Candidate is an accomplished Programmer with a proven track-record of producing good software. 

Why do interviewers ask these practically not much useful, DSA / Systemdesign questions for even entry level jobs ? The actual job involves doing things like finding regressions in undocumented third party APIs, refactoring badly written code from an acquired company, investigate sudden performance issues on highload, and other weird scenarios. Are Interviewers a breed of sociopaths who smugly want to feel superior by putting down candidates and make them feel less intelligent than they really are ? Perhaps not. Atleast majority of the interviewers are not so. The reason is, these kind of tough interviews serve as good Gatekeeping.

FAANG/ MANGA companies pay really well and they can do whatever they want and would still get hundreds (if not thousands) of candidates applying, minutes within the creation of an Opening. However, not all companies enjoy such demand. If you are a startup, you do not need a DataStructures or Algorithms expert, you just need someone who will: Integrate with PaymentGateways, Setup a few Dashboards, Generate some reports, Monitor database and tweak a few queries/indexes, etc. Doing well in a theoretical computer science based interview, does not necessarily translate to software engineering expertise practically. Programming is fun, Software Engineering is exhausting. Soft skills are more important than Analytics skills to be good at latter. 

Even google found that Interview Performance is no indicator of on-job performance [^1]. I personally have worked with some champion competitive programmers whose code I would not want to maintain. Competitive programming optimizes for speed of bringing the solution to the market, while in any sanely managed company, there needs to be some aspects of Maintainability (Tests, Readability, Coding uniformity, Cyclomatic complexity, etc.) that would be indispensable for non-throwaway code.

In fact, I would go to the extent of saying that, With the advent of AI assisted coding, the programming ability of an employee matters far lesser than Ownership, Taking Responsibility, Informing stakeholders and other soft skills of the Employees.

I know of some excellent software engineers, whom I would trust with even my life. They write good code, take pride in maintainership, break down complex problems into simple sub-problems, and are good Programmers. But most of them would NOT come out with stellar ratings in Interviews. Some of my friends who are good software engineers, turned to other roles such as Engineering/Product/Project/Program Management roles, not because they could not do Programming, but they could not allocate time for interview preparation. 

Interview Preparation in Tech is a demanding task in terms of Time and Energy. It is not easy for People who have families to look after, Parent-Teacher meetings to attend to, Finding a mate, Have a hobby (or life), etc. It needs a certain neurotic discipline and dedication that is easy to diminish as one gets old and as life consumes most of the time and energy. This preparation does not help much on the job. So one loses touch, and needs to start from scratch again whenever one needs to change jobs. 

There is also an interview coaching industry that is created inflating the value of these interviews. For a country that prides itself in rote learning, repeated chanting and celebrates exam takers, this is bad news. Most of our youth spend time, preparing for interviews rather than building things, as this is what Companies look for during hiring.

To *tldr* summarize, we need to reduce the importance of Interviews on a job change. This is already optimal in other domains (such as Healthcare, Restaurants, etc.), but needs a course-correction in Tech Interviews.

## LinkedIn and Other Players

Most of the Interview and other Hiring problems could have been solved by the numerous websites and platforms (like LinkedIn, Indeed, Monster, etc). But unfortunately none have even attempted to solve the problem. The primary reason for that, I believe, is, these platforms earn in billions of dollars already and are not motivated enough to solve this particular problem of Jobs. Why fix something when it is generating revenue !? We will take LinkedIn as an example, because that is the biggest player in my myopic view of this hiring industry. Next I will try to give *my perspective* (need not be the reality) on what went wrong with LinkedIn.

LinkedIn was started by some smart people who sensed a demand for a social network for professionals. People thronged to it so that they can connect to their colleagues and can get future job opportunities. Within 5 years, they reached 10 million users, a billion dollar valuation and a lot of funding. But in the process of LinkedIn raising funds, VCs came in. The target goal posts of the company shifted. Making Meaning became secondary to Making Money. They got listed and along with it came the pressure of share value growth. The company grew for a few years before eventually running out of gas. Microsoft paid 26 billion USD and acquired LinkedIn, their biggest acquisition till then. MSFT had a new CEO who wanted to shop to establish their company in the social networking space and facebook was unaffordable perhaps. The founders, VCs all made money, Microsoft got a shiny new social network and users, instead of building something from scratch. Everyone was happy, but it led to some new problems. 

The founder ethos (Coincidentally Paul Graham wrote an excellent writeup[^2] on this while I was making this manifesto) of the company got lost. Microsoft had to do something to justify the multi-billion purchase. Typical numbers/data-driven Product Managers with their fancy MBA degrees from fancy western Management Institutes, came with their industry-standard numbers/data-driven management styles to increase the value of LinkedIn. Every facet of the company had to be quantified, measured, tracked, prioritized, stack-ranked and either completed or rejected.

The biggest problem with number driven development is, you start measuring things which are easy to measure. For example, it is difficult to `How many people got the right jobs and stayed on it because of our platform over the last quarter ?` is a difficult metric to measure. Contrarily, what is easy to measure is, `How many hours are spent by users doomscrolling on our infinite timeline ? How can we improve it so that users stay addicted to our site ?`. Since LinkedIn started measuring the analytics for posts that people write, they started sharing it with the users. Once the users of LinkedIn got hold of statistics (view count, reach, likes, reactions etc.), they started gaming their posts for more eyeballs. This led to a bunch of LinkedIn users doing engagement farming large scale. The LinkedIn PMs too, liked these influencers as they brought in more engagement via *Doomscrolling* [^3].

LinkedIn started giving awards to Influencers, through campaigns such as `LinkedIn Top Voices`. In one particular instance, I found a standup comedian getting some Top voice award by LinkedIn. Basically, LinkedIn metamorphosized from a jobs site into a professional branding, social networking site. LinkedIn started considering Facebook, Twitter, Instagram as their primary competitors and introduced features like Videos, Images, Hashtags etc. The Timeline algorithm was tweaked to bring more content that is engaging than useful. It got filled with low-quality, copy-paste content, virtue-signalling on the TOPIC of the Season (could be DEI, Women Empowerment, Work Life Balance, etc.). People wrote politically correct status updates even if they do not believe in the cause. There was also a peer pressure to Like, React to these posts. In an attempt to pull in more young audience, or perhaps some Product Manager with Images had to get promoted, the timeline algorithm started prioritizing more posts with images. Then there was a time when Videos started autoplaying in timeline, perhaps some metric like video-consumption-time on the site had to be improved. The driven of the product got driven by Product Managers who are looking for their next promotion rather than adding value to the user.

Perhaps, never was considered a jobs site among the MSFT management, but it was an assumption that a considerable chunk of users made when they created an account on LinkedIn. Becoming a social networking site could be the right decision for LinkedIn as a company to survive, even under the Microsoft umbrella. It may be the essential thing to do as Shareholder value increase is the bedrock on which Capitalism is built. But this has led to Jobs becoming a mere side project and not the primary goal for LinkedIn.

Pivoting happens everywhere and is quite natural. AWS is bigger than Amazon book store, NVidia AI GPUs business is bigger than their Gaming Graphics cards business, Apple's iPhone and App store business is bigger than their Macs, etc. This kind of pivoting and diversity is essential for survival of the companies, lest they not get obsolete like Novell was, when Netware failed. Share growth is the only thing that could let remote job Product Managers sip their pinacoladas on a swanky swimming pool in a posh 5 star hotel, on a weekday noon.

However, with all these profit focus by Job companies and transforming to a social network, there is a void for connecting Employers and Employees and focus primarily on Jobs. Vetchi aims to fulfill this void. 

# Vetchi's Potential

## Open Source / FOSS / Libre Software

I strongly believe that the world needs an Open source website that is primarily driven with the purpose of connecting Employers and Employees. It needs to be open source not because it is a better way to do programming, but, because, that way, it would make it easy for another small player to pick up the code and host a job site instead of starting the development from scratch, when there are ideological disagreements. This may annoy VCs, but this is the foundation of the whole software freedom copyleft movements (FSF, EFF, OSI, Apache, etc.).

Historically, most early FOSS software were System Software (GNU, Linux Kernel, Apache, GNOME, Postgresql, etc.) projects. Then in the next generation, FAANG / MANGA companies were built on these open source technologies and they in turn produced some more higher layer, large scale distributed infrastructure as open source (Kubernetes, Docker, OpenSearch, etc). Now on the next phase of technological evolution, we are seeing smart people (like Mark Zuckerberg, Elon Musk) betting on open platforms for AI. However, I am not aware of any social media site that is built as FOSS other than Mastodon. While I agree with the vision of Mastodon from a libre perspective, I feel that it is a bit over-designed (Federations, Decentralized) for a simple job site. Vetchi could be an unique idea from this perspective, if it becomes successful. It may trigger an avalanche of more business applications built as FOSS, just similar to the system software. 

One of the engineering goals that I have for Vetchi is that the backend code should be runnable for the next 100 years atleast. The design choices will be made with this as a constraint. Every new external dependency will be carefully analyzed before incorporated (Means saying No to vendor-locked proprietary platforms / protocols even though it may cost cheaper in the short run). To give an example, emails will be used for notification and not iOS/Android native notifications. In fact, there may not be apps at all, but just the open-standards website only for the near foreseable future. Care will be taken to ensure some critical areas of the website are small-screen friendly though.


## Network of Trust

Users are not going to flock to Vetchi, just because it is an open source website, atleast not a majority of them. Some FOSS enthusiasts may do on the first wave. Vetchi should offer something that is Unique and not satisfied by the dozens of jobsites that exist already with deep pockets and smart personnel on their payroll. Just like every other social networking site, Vetchi should allow users to connect with one another. But we should restrict users to Connect only with people who are colleagues. How do we enforce this ? A Vetchi user is an Employee who signsup with a personal email account and can add as many official email accounts as they want. Each email account should have an unique domain and should be associated with an Employer. An Employee will be able to connect with only another Employee with a verified email from the same email domain.

Let us give some names and examples. Hermione, Ron and Harry work in a company named HogwartsInc. They all can create accounts on Vetchi and connect with each other. Arya, Cersei and Danny work on WesterosInc. They can now connect with each other. However, Hermione cannot connect with Danny because they do not share a common employer. Even if Danny and Hermione have hungaround together in a Dragonstone park, they will not be able to connect (atleast not in the V1 of Vetchi) because they do not have a common verified Employer email. However, when Danny for some reason switches to HogwardsInc in future, she can connect with either of Hermione, Ron and Harry. Basically we restrict the connectivity to the verified Employer email domain.

This eliminates a few critical cohorts of people. With this system, freshers who were classmates in academia may not be able to add each other (if they did not had a common email address domain in their institution). People will not be able to connect to their ex-colleagues in Companies that they used to work. Only current and future colleagues can be connected. These are big misses. However, I am fine with taking a stand on this for Vetchi for now. Every Connection in Vetchi should be a more reliable indicator of the two working together in an official capacity. This method is not perfect and has gaps. For example, in a big organization with 10s of 1000s of employees, no two people who have worked together can also connect. But I think that is an acceptable compromise to take. If we need to solve that also more reliably, we would need to track Teams of employees within an Org and allow Connection only between them. That would be impractical because Teams are ephemeral and dynamic. Company is a good enough abstraction level at which to allow Connection requests among people. Some improvements could be made for Academia connections for classmates, sometime in a future milestone of Vetchi.

Similar to Employees, Employers can also register in the vetchi website, by verifying their website domain. Then they will be able to create Openings in Vetchi for their company. Vetchi should also provide integration webhooks, embeddable snippets so that these Openings could be shared to other systems (such as the company website, HRS system, etc.). Every Opening in Vetchi must list a Hiring Manager and a list of potential team mates.

Users of Vetchi would be able to apply to these Openings, only if they are atleast in a 3rd level of transitive connection to either the Hiring Manager or the potential team mates listed on the Opening. This "3rd" level of transitive connectivity is something that I came up on the fly and is not backed up any research. Popular science tells us that every pair of human being can be connected by 6 degrees of separation maximum. So, I took half of it and some other intuitive factors. This could be refined further in future if needed. This way we can minimize the ThunderingHerdProblem [^4] that occurs when thousands of candidates apply for an Opening. This also ensures that Employees hired will be in the network of the team mates already and can be sought feedback easily.

However, this new model of applying for jobs can turn out to be a total failure and impractical. So, this cannot be the only way for applying for jobs. Employers should be able to create Openings and allow "anyone" to apply also. This will ensure that Vetchi does not break any of the existing hiring workflow that Companies may have, but just provide an optional experimental process that we hope would improve the flow.

In addition to the Employer and Employee, there is a third category of users that we want to have in our system. These are called *Agents*. These Agents are brokers who can connect to any Employee registered in Vetchi. They are not limited by the work email domain restrictions that we mentioned earlier as a pre-requisite for two Employees to connect. The Agent user would have other restrictions though. The Agent type of users must have a website, registered formally as a company. The Agent type of users will be able to add private notes for any of the Employees. 

### To summarise
* Employees type of Users will be able to create a profile, verify their professional email, connect to their colleagues, apply for Openings
* Agents type of User, who will be able to connect to Employees type of Users, take private notes. Work with Employer type of Users on a per-Opening basis, get paid from the Employer
* Employer type of Users will be able to verify the company domain, Create Openings, Optionally connect with Agents to procure Candidates, Shortlist and track Applicants, Schedule Interviews, Co-ordinate Interview reviews, Issue offers or send rejection emails, integrate with HRMS and other IT systems for Onboarding, etc.

### Policies
* Employee type of Users should never be charged money on any promise (profile will be pushed, prioritized). Fairness should be maintained.
* Agents should charge money only from the Employer. Any Agent who is found to be seeking money from Employees will be banned from the site permanently. This may not be easy to achieve but we would try our best to achieve this.
* Employee type of Users should be allowed to selectively block any Agent from contacting
* The functionality of Job providing should not be deprioritized for monetary gains in other potential revenue streams
* Employee type of Users will not be able to write fake posts that would endorse interview training materials or resume review services. In fact, this social network may not allow all its members to post messages. Let the Employees use other social media (such as facebook, linkedin, etc.) if they want to pontificate.
* Number of hours spent by Employee type of Users on Vetchi site could be tracked but not the central point in making decisions for the feature planning. This is quite easy to achieve when Vetchi is a one-person company or even when it is a small company. But it would be tough to enforce if the company grows big. The only way to achieve this would be to have strong leadership, not taking external money from VCs who are primarily driven by money. Vetchi should be managed with a perspective that prioritizes Longevity instead of extreme Profitability and Growth in short term. This point may need some eloquent explanation at some point of time in future. There are some literature on this based on keywords such as Responsible Capitalism.
* Agents and Employers can be charged by Vetchi periodically to sustain as a business. How much ? I do not know at this time. Employers can even be allowed to write professional blog posts and be shared here. Definitely more people would read here instead of on the company website. Some of the other interview co-ordination software like Greenhouse, Lever, Zoho Recruit etc. charge anywhere from 5000 USD to 25,000+ USD per year. We can disrupt here.


# Future Potential

Vetchi could potentially grow into a behemoth platform, on the likes of Peoplesoft, Workday, ADP etc. across multiple HR functionalities. But we will start humble and small as a job site. All these big companies could be built as separate entities that work on top of the Vetchi platform with open competition and could pay money to use the Vetchi platform data. The idea of a job site / database should be considered holy and not derailed.

Could do a myriad of other things like Employers rating, CEO Approval, Anonymous Survey, etc. 

While most of the motivation was from tech jobs, Vetchi should be a problem to provide jobs across multiple domains and not just tech jobs alone. With the advent of AI, most of the tech jobs may anyway go away is what the fortune tellers are predicting anyway.


[^1]: https://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/20/business/in-head-hunting-big-data-may-not-be-such-a-big-deal.html?_r=1&
[^2]: https://paulgraham.com/foundermode.html
[^3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doomscrolling
[^4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thundering_herd_problem 
