A braindump of what the scoring-algorithm implemented/used as part of [sortinghat](sortinghat) should or should not be. All of these are just thoughts and would evolve. The final version may be something totally different from what is discussed below.

- Should take up the long bio into consideration. Should correlate this with the JD.
- Each hubuser should be allowed to keep three tags in their bio/profile which should be correlated against the JD
- Resume should be correlated against the JD. But an applicant may generate a resume that would score well against the JD and use it for applying. So, resume should NOT be the only criterion in the matching. This is why the long_bio correlation becomes important. This is also why we need to restrict the profile to have only three tags maximum per hub user.
- Certifications should be included in the correlation and scoring. JD should have a provision to include a particular certification as a mandatory requirement. So we need a way to track of all possible certifications. A user can add a random url as a proof of certification on a random hot area on demand (such as AI as of writing this). So there must be some kind of way to associate weights for Certifications. Like, a kubernetes certification from LinuxFoundation should carry a higher weight than a kubernetes certification from a random cheating Institute. We should not however get into the business of ranking/sorting Institutes.
- Education Institutes too can have some weight, but this is bound to get misused or used for discrimination. We could provide a way for Employers to restrict based on colleges, but that is error prone. If we allow a per-nation tier system for institutes, that may be useful, but even that would be discriminatory. More thought needs to be put on this. Add to this the cultural differences. A "IIT Dolakpur" may need to be scored much below a "PSG Tech" but a North Indian or non-Indian recruiter may be swayed by the IIT tag, into the tiering. So the tiering must be in some other order ? Is it safe to say that the scoring algorithm should not even get into the business of scoring/ranking institutes and let the recruiter / hiringmanager to decide based on their worldview !?
